Switching patients with asthma from chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) albuterol to hydrofluoroalkane-134a (HFA) albuterol.

Chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) propellants deplete stratospheric ozone. Production and use of CFCs, except for certain critical exemptions, has been prohibited by the Montreal Protocol. Use of CFCs as propellants in metered-dose inhalers (MDIs) is still allowed, but the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is planning the transition to alternative propellants for use in MDIs. Hydrofluoroalkane-134a (HFA), a non-ozone-depleting propellant, has been used to reformulate albuterol (HFA albuterol). This study evaluates whether comparable safety and efficacy continues for 12 weeks after patients with asthma are switched from CFC albuterol to HFA albuterol. Patients with asthma stabilized on CFC albuterol during a 12-week safety and efficacy trial were randomized to either continue receiving CFC albuterol or to be switched to receive HFA albuterol in a yearlong safety and efficacy trial. Safety and efficacy were compared over the first 12 weeks of the yearlong trial between patients who had remained on CFC albuterol and those who had been switched to HFA albuterol. Bronchodilator efficacy was evaluated by serial spirometry for 6 hr after the patients self-administered the study drug in the clinic. Safety was assessed by measuring changes in pulse rate, blood pressure, and electrocardiogram (ECG) intervals after dosing with study drug, monitoring adverse events, and performing prestudy and poststudy laboratory testing and physical examinations. No significant differences in bronchodilator efficacy between the patients continuing to receive CFC albuterol and those switched to HFA albuterol were found in the 12 weeks after the switch. No differences between the two products were found for changes in pulse rate, blood pressure, and ECG intervals. Adverse event profiles were similar for the two products, except the patients remaining on CFC albuterol reported increased asthma symptoms and rhinitis significantly more often than the patients switched to HFA albuterol. No clinically meaningful changes in laboratory tests or physical examinations were found in either treatment group. Patients with asthma switched from CFC albuterol to HFA albuterol receive comparable bronchodilation with a similar safety profile as those continuing to receive CFC albuterol.

