Effects of oral brovincamine on visual field damage in patients with normal-tension glaucoma with low-normal intraocular pressure.

PURPOSE To prospectively study the effect of oral brovincamine, a relatively selective cerebral vasodilator, on further deterioration of visual field in patients with normal-tension glaucoma (NTG) with low-normal intraocular pressure (IOP).
METHODS Fifty-two patients with NTG (average age 57.7 years) with an IOP that was consistently less than 15 mmHg were randomly assigned to receive oral brovincamine (20 mg three times daily) or to an untreated control group. The groups were prospectively followed for 2 years with visual field examinations every 4 months, using the 30-2 Humphrey perimeter program. Changes in mean deviation (MD), corrected pattern standard deviation (CPSD), and total deviation (TD) at 74 test points were analyzed using regression analysis with linear mixed model. Data from one eye without media opacity of each subject were analyzed.
RESULTS There were no differences between groups in age; sex distribution; refraction; blood pressure; baseline IOP; MD, CPSD, or TD at each point. Changes in MD (standard error [SE]) during the study period were -0.778 (0.178) and -0.071 (0.195) dB/year in the control and brovincamine groups, respectively; change in the control group was significantly more negative than in the brovincamine group. Change in CPSD (SE) was 0.032 (0.015) and 0.004 (0.016) dB/year in the control and brovincamine groups, respectively. Change in the control group was significantly positive, but the intergroup difference was not significant. Change in TD was significantly negative at six test points in the control group, whereas no points showed a significant trend in the brovincamine group; the intergroup difference was significant. The average IOP was 13.2 mmHg and 13.1 mmHg in the control and brovincamine groups, respectively, and there was no significant intergroup difference.
CONCLUSION Oral brovincamine may retard further visual field deterioration in patients with NTG who have low-normal IOP.

