Effect of spinal versus general anesthesia on bladder compliance and intraabdominal pressure during transurethral procedures.

STUDY OBJECTIVE To evaluate the influence of spinal versus general anesthesia on bladder compliance and intraabdominal pressure in elderly males undergoing elective transurethral resection of the prostate.
DESIGN Prospective, randomized, open-label study.
SETTING Teaching hospital.
PATIENTS 21 ASA physical status I, II, and III patients at least 18 years of age, undergoing transurethral surgery.
INTERVENTIONS According to a computer-generated randomization schedule, patients were allocated to one of two groups. In Group Spinal (S), 10 mg of hyperbaric tetracaine was administered intrathecally. In Group General Anesthesia (GA), patients received, fentanyl intravenous (i.v. 1 to 2 micrograms/kg and propofol i.v. 1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg for induction of anesthesia. Thereafter, a laryngeal mask airway was inserted and, with spontaneous ventilation, anesthesia was maintained by administering isoflurane (end-tidal 0.7% to 1.2%) and 70% nitrous oxide (N2O) in oxygen. Intraabdominal pressure and bladder compliance were recorded prior to the induction of anesthesia and immediately before the onset of the surgical procedure.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS The two groups were demographically comparable. In Group S, mean bladder compliance was significantly (p = 0.003) higher and mean intraabdominal pressure significantly lower (p = 0.007) when compared to baseline preanesthetic values. In Group GA, mean intraabdominal pressure significantly (p = 0.006) decreased when compared to baseline preanesthetic recordings. Following the induction of general anesthesia, a small change in bladder compliance was noted. However, statistical significance was not reached. Data were analyzed and compared using Student's t-test (p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant).
CONCLUSION Both spinal and general anesthesia induced a significant decrease in intraabdominal pressure. While both techniques were associated with an increase in bladder compliance, statistical significance was demonstrated only in the spinal anesthesia treatment group.

