Use of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor to increase chemotherapy dose-intensity: a randomized trial in very high-risk childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

PURPOSE To determine whether the use of a recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor ([G-CSF] lenogastrim) can increase the chemotherapy dose-intensity (CDI) delivered during consolidation chemotherapy of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
PATIENTS AND METHODS Sixty-seven children with very high-risk ALL were randomized (slow early response to therapy, 55 patients; translocation t(9;22) or t(4;11), 12 patients). Consolidation consisted of six courses of chemotherapy; the first, third, and fifth courses were a combination of high-dose cytarabine, etoposide, and dexamethasone (R3), whereas the second, fourth, and sixth courses included vincristine, prednisone, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and methotrexate (COPADM). G-CSF was given after each course, and the next scheduled course was started as soon as neutrophil count was > 1 x 10(9)/L and platelet count was > 100 x 10(9)/L. CDI was calculated using the interval from day 1 of the first course to hematologic recovery after the fifth course (100% CDI = 105-day interval).
RESULTS CDI was significantly increased in the G-CSF group compared with the non-G-CSF group (mean +/- 95% confidence interval, 105 +/- 5% v 91 +/- 4%; P <.001). This higher intensity was a result of shorter post-R3 intervals in the G-CSF group, whereas the post-COPADM intervals were not statistically reduced. After the R3 courses, the number of days with fever and intravenous antibiotics and duration of hospitalization were significantly decreased by G-CSF, whereas reductions observed after COPADM were not statistically significant. Duration of granulocytopenia was reduced in the G-CSF group, but thrombocytopenia was prolonged, and the number of platelet transfusions was increased. Finally, the 3-year probability of event-free survival was not different between the two groups.
CONCLUSION G-CSF can increase CDI in high-risk childhood ALL. Its effects depend on the chemotherapy regimen given before G-CSF administration. In our study, a higher CDI did not improve disease control.

