Plasma antioxidant status after high-dose chemotherapy: a randomized trial of parenteral nutrition in bone marrow transplantation patients.

BACKGROUND Chemotherapy and radiation therapy result in increased free radical formation and depletion of tissue antioxidants. It is not known whether parenteral nutrition (PN) administered during bone marrow transplantation (BMT) supports systemic antioxidant status.
OBJECTIVE The aims of the study were to determine 1) whether high-dose chemotherapy decreases concentrations of major circulating antioxidants in patients undergoing BMT and 2) whether administration of standard PN maintains systemic antioxidant concentrations compared with PN containing micronutrients and minimal lipids alone.
DESIGN Twenty-four BMT patients were randomly assigned to receive either standard PN containing conventional amounts of dextrose, amino acids, micronutrients, and lipid (120 kJ/d) or a solution containing only micronutrients (identical to those in standard PN) and a small amount of lipid (12 kJ/d). Plasma antioxidant status was measured before conditioning therapy and serially at days 1, 3, 7, 10, and 14 after BMT.
RESULTS Plasma glutathione (GSH) and alpha- and gamma-tocopherol concentrations decreased and the GSH redox state became more oxidized after conditioning chemotherapy. Plasma cysteine concentrations were unchanged, whereas cystine concentrations increased. Plasma vitamin C and zinc concentrations and GSH peroxidase activity increased over time. Plasma alpha-tocopherol concentrations were lower in patients given standard PN. There were no differences in other plasma antioxidants between groups.
CONCLUSIONS A significant decline in GSH-glutathione disulfide, cysteine-cystine, and vitamin E status occurs after chemotherapy and BMT. Standard PN does not improve antioxidant status compared with administration of micronutrients alone. Further evaluation of PN formulations to support patients undergoing high-dose chemotherapy and BMT are needed.

