Comparison of high and low dose of the inhaled steroid, budesonide, as an initial treatment in newly detected asthma.

The importance of early initiation of inhaled steroids even in mild asthma has been documented in several studies. It is not, however, clear whether the treatment should be started with a high or a low dose of the inhaled steroid. We have compared the effects of high and low dose inhaled steroid, budesonide, in patients with newly detected asthma. We studied 101 adult patients with newly detected bronchial asthma who were without inhaled steroid or any regular pharmacological treatment for their asthma. The patients were randomly allocated to two treatment groups: one to receive 800 microg inhaled budesonide per day and the other to receive 200 microg inhaled budesonide per day. The drugs were given with a Turbuhaler dry powder inhaler. During the 3-month treatment period, no significant differences between the treatment groups were noted in morning or evening PEF values, in spirometric parameters, in asthmatic symptoms or in the use of rescue beta2-agonists. The decrease in bronchial hyperresponsiveness was, however, more marked in the high dose budesonide group, reaching a borderline significance (P=0.10 high vs. low dose budesonide). In addition, in serum markers of asthmatic inflammation significant differences were shown between the treatment groups. The decrease in the number of blood eosinophils during the treatment was more marked in the high dose budesonide group (P=0.02; high vs. low dose budesonide). In serum ECP no change was observed in the low dose budesonide group, but a marked decrease in the high-dose budesonide group (P=0.008; high vs. low dose budesonide). The change was even more marked with regard to serum EPX (P=0.005; high vs. low dose budesonide). Our results support the view that the treatment of newly detected asthma should be started with a high dose of inhaled steroid. The low dose may not be enough to suppress asthmatic inflammation despite good clinical primary response.

