Effectiveness of the school dental screening programme in stimulating dental attendance for children in need of treatment in Northern Ireland.

UNLABELLED The school dental screening programme has been in existence from the beginning of the 20th century yet its value in encouraging attendance among children with a dental health need is not fully established.
OBJECTIVE To evaluate the effectiveness of school dental screening in promoting dental attendance among children with a treatment need and to examine the relative importance of screening, social class and other factors in dental attendance.
METHODS Sixty-four participating schools were assigned to study and control groups using a stratified, blocked randomisation technique. The study group children received the standard school dental screening and the dental attendance of those with a positive screening result was assessed after 2 months by means of a questionnaire issued to the children's parents. The control group children were not, at this stage, screened, yet their parents received the same questionnaire assessing dental attendance over the 2-month period. However, only questionnaires from control group children who had a positive result at a subsequent screening were retained for analysis.
RESULTS A total of 2,321 children were screened, with 980 having a positive result. The mean dmft of those screening positive was 4.85. In all, 664 completed questionnaires were returned, giving a response rate of 67.8%. Dental attendance was reported among 45.5% of the study group (n=352) in the 2 months following screening. In the same period, 27.6% of the control group (n=312) claimed attendance. The effect was found to be significant among the high employed group (P<0.01) and the unemployed group (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION School dental screening was capable of stimulating dental attendance. The strong effect among the lowest socio-economic group shows that school dental screening may be used to decrease dental health inequalities.

