Efficacy and tolerability of antibiotics in patients undergoing H. pylori eradication.

BACKGROUND/AIMS Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection is one of the most common gastrointestinal diseases. An increasing number of people undergo different treatment options. Unfortunately, H. pylori therapy may be troublesome for drug side effects and inefficacious for resistance to antibiotics.
METHODOLOGY One hundred and ninety-three (193) H. pylori-positive patients were randomly assigned to one of the following 7-day treatments: Group A (N = 64): amoxicillin, clarithromycin and rabeprazole; Group B (N = 64): tinidazole, clarithromycin and ranitidine bismuth citrate; Group C (N = 65): tinidazole, clarithromycin and rabeprazole Eradication was assessed by 13C-Urea Breath Test 6-8 weeks after the end of the therapy. Not-eradicated patients underwent a second cycle with tinidazole, tetracycline, bismuth and rabeprazole. All patients were asked to complete a validated questionnaire regarding presence and intensity of drug side effects.
RESULTS One hundred and eighty-eight out of the 193 H. pylori-positive patients (96%) completed therapy. No significant difference in eradication rates was observed among the three groups both in intention to treat analysis and in per protocol analysis. No significant difference in incidence of side effects occurred among groups after the first-line regimens: 48% in group A, 44% in group B and 46% in group C. Twenty-two out of the 193 enrolled subjects (11%) were not eradicated after the first-line therapy. Among them, 86% were successfully eradicated by the tinidazole, tetracycline, bismuth and rabeprazole therapy. Moreover, during quadruple therapy, a higher prevalence and intensity of side effects than in each one of the groups submitted to the first-line triple therapy was observed.
CONCLUSIONS This study shows that triple rabeprazole-based eradicating regimens are effective and safe. Incidence of side effects seems low and similar in different three-drug regimens used. Quadruple therapy, which appear highly efficacious as a second line therapy, is associated with a significantly higher incidence of side effects when compared to first-line treatment.

