Capsular contracture around saline-filled fine textured and smooth mammary implants: a prospective 7.5-year follow-up.

In a previous prospective randomized clinical study comparing in the same patient textured and smooth saline-filled mammary implants (Biocell) with large pore size (300 to 600 microm), we saw no difference in capsular contracture. This study was undertaken in a similar way to compare capsular contracture around smooth and textured saline-filled prostheses with pores of small size. During a period of 7.5 years, the breast hardness was followed up, and at the end of the study patient satisfaction was evaluated. Twenty healthy women with a mean age of 30 years were operated on for breast augmentation. Two surgeons performed all operations in a standardized way. Each patient received subglandularly a Siltex textured saline-filled prosthesis with a pore size of 30 to 70 microm in one breast, and a smooth saline-filled prosthesis in the other. The hardness of the breasts was evaluated after 0.5, 1, and 7.5 years using Baker grading and applanation tonometry. Eighteen patients completed 1-year and 7.5-year follow-up. Two breasts with smooth prostheses were contracted after 6 months (Baker III or IV). After 1 year, four patients with smooth prostheses and one with a textured prosthesis had capsular contracture (p = 0.34). Seven and one-half years after surgery, six patents with smooth and four with textured implants had contracture (p = 0.66). On two patients with smooth prostheses and one patient with a textured prosthesis, the capsule around the implant hardened between 6 and 12 months. Between 1 year and 7.5 years, three breasts with smooth and textured implants contracted and one with a textured implant softened.The patients reported on a Visual Analogue Scale (1 to 10) the impact of the augmentation on their quality of life to be 9 +/- 1. Four patients preferred the breast with the smooth prosthesis, three preferred the breast with the textured prosthesis, and the others found both breasts equal. This study showed no significant difference of contracture with smooth versus fine textured implants. The majority of the patients preferred the smooth implants. The patients reported that the breast augmentation had had an extremely high impact on their quality of life.

