Acute intravenous L-arginine infusion decreases endothelin-1 levels and improves endothelial function in patients with angina pectoris and normal coronary arteriograms: correlation with asymmetric dimethylarginine levels.

BACKGROUND We tested the hypothesis that asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) levels could be elevated and influence endothelin-1 and nitric oxide release and action in patients with cardiac syndrome X (CSX). In addition, we evaluated whether an intravenous infusion of L-arginine would improve endothelial function in these subjects.
METHODS AND RESULTS Nine patients with CSX and 14 control subjects underwent a continuous infusion of L-arginine (0.125 g/min) or saline for 120 minutes. Sixty minutes after L-arginine or saline infusions, an intravenous insulin bolus (0.1 U/kg) combined with a euglycemic clamp was performed. Basal ADMA and endothelin-1 levels were higher in patients with CSX than in controls. At the end of the first hour of infusion, compared with saline, L-arginine infusion increased basal forearm blood flow, nitrite and nitrate (NOx), and forearm cGMP release and decreased endothelin-1. After insulin bolus, during saline, insulin-induced NOx, endothelin-1, and forearm cGMP release was almost abolished. Conversely, L-arginine restored a physiological profile of all endothelial variables compared with control subjects. In control subjects, compared with saline infusion, L-arginine infusion did not modify any parameter. ADMA levels were positively correlated with basal endothelin-1 levels and negatively correlated with insulin-induced incremental levels of NOx and forearm cGMP release.
CONCLUSIONS Plasma ADMA levels are increased in patients with CSX, and they are correlated with increases in endothelin-1 and reductions in insulin-induced increments in plasma NOx and cGMP, effects that are reversed by intravenous L-arginine. These data suggest that increased ADMA levels play a role in the abnormal vascular reactivity that is observed in patients with CSX.

