Investigation of erosion and abrasion on enamel and dentine: a model in situ using toothpastes of different abrasivity.

BACKGROUND Studies in vitro suggest that abrasion and erosion may act synergistically to produce wear of enamel and dentine. Methods in situ are recently available to study separately erosion and abrasion of dental tissues. The aim of this study was to combine two in situ protocols to study the interplay between erosion and abrasion of enamel and dentine.
METHOD The study was a single-blind, randomised, five-treatment cross-over design involving 15 healthy volunteers. During each 10-day study period, subjects wore from 0900 to 1700 h an upper removable acrylic appliance holding one polished enamel and one polished dentine specimen. The specimen treatment regimens were: 1. Drinking water and brushing with toothpaste A. 2. Drinking water and brushing with toothpaste B. 3. Drinking orange juice. 4. Drinking orange juice and brushing with toothpaste A. 5. Drinking orange juice and brushing with toothpaste B. Drinking and brushing times were around 0900, 1100, 1300 and 1500 h. Drinks were consumed as 250 ml over 10 min and brushing ex vivo for 1 min to each specimen. Measurement of tissue loss was made on days 5 and 10 of each period using a profilometer.
RESULTS All treatments produced increasing tissue loss over time, which was considerably greater for dentine than enamel. For enamel, the data at days 5 and 10 showed a significant effect for erosion (i.e. orange juice was significantly more erosive than water), but no significant effect for abrasion (i.e. no significant difference between the two toothpaste treatments). The combined orange juice and toothpaste effects were directional for synergy but did not reach significance. For dentine at day 10, many specimens exceeded the 50 microm set limit of the profilometer and only day 5 data were considered. There were significant effects for erosion (orange juice produced significantly more erosion than water) and for abrasion (paste A was significantly more abrasive to dentine than paste B). The synergy effect could not be examined for dentine due to the truncation effect as the set limit of the profilometer was exceeded.
CONCLUSIONS Erosion increases the susceptibility of enamel to toothpaste abrasion. Dentine is considerably more susceptible than enamel to erosion and abrasion alone or combined. Dentine loss appears to correlate with toothpaste abrasivity (RDA value).

