Observational learning and the formation of classes of reading skills by individuals with autism and other developmental disabilities.

We investigated whether individuals with developmental disabilities will demonstrate stimulus classes after observing another individual demonstrate the prerequisite conditional discriminations. In Experiment 1, participants learned conditional discriminations among dictated words, pictures, and printed words. They also observed a model without disabilities demonstrate conditional discriminations among a different set of dictated words, pictures, and printed words. The classes assigned to each participant belonged to a larger superordinate category, as did the classes assigned to each model. The superordinate categories were different for participants and models. All participants subsequently demonstrated full stimulus classes with the stimuli involved in direct training: They named pictures, read printed words, and matched pictures and words to one another. However, based on observing a model, none of the participants demonstrated full stimulus classes. In Experiment 2, participants learned conditional discriminations among the stimuli in three sets, and observed a model's training with the stimuli in three different sets. The classes assigned to each participant belonged to the same larger superordinate category as did those assigned to their respective model. All participants subsequently demonstrated full stimulus classes with the stimuli involved in direct training. They also demonstrated full classes with at least one of their model's sets of training stimuli. When full stimulus classes did not occur from observing a model, participants named the model's pictures, read the model's printed words, or matched the model's pictures and words. Stimulus class technology, coupled with the opportunity to observe another individual perform a skill, may be an economical and efficient means of teaching persons with developmental disabilities.

