Leukocyte-depleted reperfusion of transplanted human hearts: a randomized, double-blind clinical trial.

Standard methods of myocardial preservation for heart transplantation have generally provided good results. Preservation times beyond 3 hours, however, have been associated with decreased survival. Leukocyte-mediated reperfusion injury is partly responsible for decreased graft function after prolonged graft ischemia. Leukocyte-depleted reperfusion has been shown experimentally to improve cardiac function after cold ischemic arrest. To determine the efficacy and safety of leukocyte-depleted reperfusion, 20 patients were enrolled in a randomized, double-blind clinical trial to be treated with either warm whole blood reperfusion (group I; n = 9) or warm leukocyte-depleted blood reperfusion (group II; n = 11). Reperfusion with leukocyte-depleted blood or whole blood was carried out for 10 minutes, with enriched cardioplegic solution added for the first 3 minutes of reperfusion. The mean donor and recipient age and the ischemic time (142 versus 153 minutes) were not significantly different between the two groups. Coronary sinus release of creatinine phosphokinase-MB 5 minutes after reperfusion was significantly less in group II (1.65 EU/min) than in group I (3.83 units/min; p = 0.05). Thromboxane B2 release was also significantly less (p = 0.05) in group II (33.6 pg/min) than in group I (67.0 pg/min). All hearts functioned adequately in both groups. The duration of inotropic support was shorter in group II than in group I, but the difference was not statistically significant. Postoperative hemodynamics, rejection episodes, and infectious complications were also not significantly different between groups in a mean follow-up of 9 months. Mean ejection fraction 1 month after operation was 65% in both groups. One early death occurred at 66 days secondary to infection; two late deaths occurred in group II, both from rejection. Leukocyte-depleted reperfusion is safe and easily applied in the operating room. Furthermore, leukocyte-depleted reperfusion decreases biochemical evidence of reperfusion injury. Although not influencing postoperative cardiac function when the ischemic time is short, less than 3 hours, leukocyte-depleted reperfusion may prevent significant reperfusion injury and improve posttransplantation graft function when ischemic times are long. Safe extension of the ischemic time would expand the donor pool and allow for better crossmatching.

