Rapid-sequence intubation of head trauma patients: prevention of fasciculations with pancuronium versus minidose succinylcholine.

INTRODUCTION Fasciculations during rapid-sequence intubation may lead to increased intracranial pressure and emesis with aspiration. Standard rapid-sequence intubation requires a nondepolarizing blocking agent before succinylcholine administration.
HYPOTHESIS Prevention of fasciculations during rapid-sequence intubation of head trauma patients can be accomplished as safely and effectively with minidose succinylcholine as with a defasciculating dose of pancuronium.
DESIGN A prospective, randomized, double-blind study.
SETTING An inner-city county trauma center with 70,000 patient visits per year.
PARTICIPANTS Sequential adult head trauma patients requiring rapid-sequence intubation who had no contraindications to succinylcholine or pancuronium.
INTERVENTIONS Each head trauma patient requiring rapid-sequence intubation who met the inclusion criteria received standard rapid-sequence intubation maneuvers and lidocaine (1 mg/kg) IV. Patients were randomized to receive either minidose succinylcholine (0.1 mg/kg) or pancuronium (0.03 mg/kg) IV one minute prior to the full paralytic dose of succinylcholine (1.5 mg/kg) IV. Fasciculations were recorded using a graded visual scale.
RESULTS Of 46 patients, eight of 19 (42%) in the pancuronium group and six of 27 (22%) in the succinylcholine group experienced fasciculations. No statistically significant difference in fasciculations was detected between the two groups using chi 2 analysis. Complete relaxation of the cords was present in all but two patients, one in each group. No patient in either group experienced emesis or significant dysrhythmias.
CONCLUSION Pretreatment with minidose succinylcholine causes no greater incidence of fasciculations than pancuronium in rapid-sequence intubation of head trauma patients in an ED setting. Thus succinylcholine may be used as the sole paralytic agent in rapid-sequence intubation of head trauma patients.

