A double blind randomized trial to compare the effects of eprosartan and enalapril on blood pressure, platelets, and endothelium function in patients with essential hypertension.

The renin-angiotensin system is the major contributor to development of hypertension, atherosclerosis, and many other cardiovascular diseases. Angiotensin II, one of the main effectors of this system, contributes to the pathogenesis of hypertension and plays an important role in monocyte, platelet, and endothelium interactions. The effects on platelet and endothelial function, either by angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists, are still not well understood. A double-blind, randomized, prospective trial of either enalapril (10-20 mg daily) or eprosartan (400-800 mg daily) over a 10-week period was conducted in 42 patients (27 males, 15 females). Platelet activation was evaluated by measuring platelet factor 4 (PF-4), beta-thromboglobulin (beta-TG), the ratio of platelet factor 4 to beta-thromboglobulin, and endothelial function by measuring total plasma nitrate levels, von Willebrand factor (vWF) levels, and blood flow using venous occlusive plethysmography. After a 10-week treatment with enalapril or eprosartan, the sitting blood pressure in both the enalapril group (from 152.2 +/- 18.7 mmHg to 141.9 +/- 23.5 mmHg, P < 0.05) and eprosartan group (from 151 +/- 10.0 mmHg to 142.3 +/- 12.9 mmHg, P < 0.05) was significantly reduced. Significant diastolic blood pressure (DPB) reduction (from 94 +/- 8.7 to 84.5 +/- 9.6 mmHg, P < 0.05) and a greater DBP reduction response were found in the eprosartan group (63% in eprosartan versus 25% in enalapril). Additionally, dose-dependent reductions in the indices of platelet activation and endothelial dysfunction were observed in patients administered high dose treatments of eprosartan and enalapril, and the beneficial effects of these agents were not correlated with the reduction of blood pressure using both agents. Eprosartan is effective and well-tolerated in the treatment of mid-to-moderate hypertension, and the DBP response reduction to eprosartin was better than that to enalapril. A high dose of either eprosartan or enalapril significantly decreased the indices of platelet activation and endothelial dysfunction in hypertensive patients. The benefits of both agents cannot be explained solely by their antihypertensive effects and possibly may be mediated through their unique effect on angiotensin blockade.

