Low-dose angiotensin II receptor antagonists and angiotensin II-converting enzyme inhibitors alone or in combination for treatment of primary glomerulonephritis.

OBJECTIVE The renin-angiotensin system is thought to be involved in the progression of chronic renal diseases of both diabetic and non-diabetic origin. It has been confirmed that angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) reduce urinary protein excretion and attenuate the development of renal injury. Clinical data comparing the renal effects of ACEIs and ARBs, either singly or in combination, are scarce and usually concern the use of standard or high doses.
MATERIAL AND METHODS This was a prospective, randomized, 9-month study of the effects of low doses of losartan (25 mg; n = 18) versus enalapril (10 mg; n = 18) versus the combination of losartan (25 mg) and enalapril (10 mg) (n = 16) on proteinuria, kidney function and metabolic profile in 54 patients with biopsy-proven chronic glomerulonephritis, hypertension and normal or slightly impaired kidney function. The clinical evaluation and laboratory tests were performed before treatment (baseline) and after 3 and 9 months of therapy.
RESULTS After 3 months, significant decreases in proteinuria were observed in all groups: losartan, 22.6% (p = 0.02); enalapril, 43% (p = 0.012); and combined therapy, 63% (p = 0.001). This anti-proteinuric effect was even greater after 9 months of therapy: losartan, 44.2% (p = 0.02); enalapril, 49.6% (p = 0.02); and combined therapy, 51% (p = 0.003). There was no significant difference between losartan and enalapril with respect to their impact on proteinuria level. Proteinuria reduction was significantly greater in patients receiving combined therapy in comparison with losartan treatment after 3 months of therapy (p = 0.02). Creatinine clearance and serum creatinine were stable during the entire study period in all patients. No significant changes in lipids, serum uric acid or protein levels were observed.
CONCLUSIONS These results indicate that proteinuria is reduced by low doses of losartan or enalapril. The combination of these drugs seems to be beneficial and may offer an additional renoprotective effect. This needs to be confirmed in a study with a larger sample size.

