Effects of home strength training and stretching versus stretching alone after lumbar disk surgery: a randomized study with a 1-year follow-up.

OBJECTIVE To assess the adherence to and effects of a 12-month combined strength and stretching home exercise regimen versus stretching alone, on patient outcome after lumbar disk surgery.
DESIGN Randomized controlled trial.
SETTING Departments of physical medicine and rehabilitation and orthopedics at a Finnish hospital.
PARTICIPANTS Patients (N=126) were randomized into either a combined strength training and stretching group (STG, n=65) or a control group (CG, n=61).
INTERVENTION The STG was instructed to perform strength training and both the STG and CG were instructed in the same stretching and stabilization exercises for 12 months.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES Pain on the visual analog scale (VAS), the Oswestry and the Million disability indexes, isometric and dynamic trunk muscle strength, mobility in the lumbar spine, and straight-leg raising were measured.
RESULTS The trial was completed by 71% and 77% of the patients from the STG and the CG, respectively. The mean strength training frequency decreased from 1.5 to 0.6 times a week in the STG during the intervention. The mean stretching frequency decreased from 3.7 to 1.6 times a week in both groups. Median back and leg pain varied between 17 and 23 mm (VAS), and the Million and Oswestry indices varied between 14 and 23 points 2 months postoperatively. No statistically significant changes took place in these outcome measures during the 12-month follow-up in both groups. The changes in isometric trunk extension favored the STG ( P =.016) during the first 2 months. However, during the whole 12-month training period, both dynamic and isometric back extension and flexion strength, as well as mobility of the spine and repetitive squat-test results, improved significantly in both groups, and no differences were found in any of the physical function parameters between the STG and CG.
CONCLUSIONS At the 12-month follow-up, no statistically significant changes were found in the physical function, pain, or disability measures between the groups. In the STG, training adherence with regard to training frequency and intensity remained too low to lead to specific training-induced adaptations in the neuromuscular system. Progressive loading, supervision of training, and psychosocial support is needed in long-term rehabilitation programs to maintain patient motivation.

