Minimal tolerance to the bronchoprotective effect of inhaled salmeterol/fluticasone combination on allergene challenge.

In order to assess whether the administration of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination (50/250 mcg by Diskus) for 1 week induces tolerance to the bronchoprotective effect of salmeterol on allergen challenge, a single-blind, cross-over study was carried out. We studied nine subjects (eight men and one woman; mean age+/-SD: 31.3+/-11.0 yr) with mild intermittent allergic asthma, never treated with regular beta2-agonists or inhaled corticosteroids. In a previous allergen challenge all subjects had shown a positive early airway response (EAR) to allergen. They underwent allergen challenge after 1-week treatment with placebo and a single dose of placebo immediately before allergen challenge (T1), or 1-week treatment with placebo and a single dose of salmeterol/fluticasone immediately before allergen challenge (T2), or 1-week treatment with salmeterol/fluticasone combination bid and a single dose of salmeterol/fluticasone immediately before allergen challenge (T3). EAR was evaluated both as maximum decrease in FEV1 (MaxDeltaFEV1 %) after allergen challenge and as area under FEV1 -time curve. MaxDeltaFEV1 % during allergen challenge protected by placebo (T1) was significantly greater than MaxDeltaFEV1 % during allergen challenges protected by single dose of salmeterol/fluticasone (T2) and by salmeterol/fluticasone 1-week treatment (T3). No difference was found in MaxDeltaFEV1 % between T2 and T3. The same results were observed also after computing the area under the curve for each challenge. When individually considered, all subjects were protected against EAR (protection index > or = 80%) at T2, while at 3 seven out of nine subjects were still protected against EAR. In conclusion, the simultaneous administration of salmeterol and fluticasone in the same device prevents in almost 80% of examined subjects the development of tolerance to the protective effect of salmeterol on allergen challenge. This observation may contribute to explain the positive interaction between inhaled beta2-agonists and corticosteroids in the long-term treatment of asthma.

