Clinical evaluation of the intraoral fluoride releasing system in radiation-induced xerostomic subjects. Part 2: Phase I study.

Radiation-induced xerostomia can result in the rapid onset and progression of dental caries in head and neck cancer patients. Topically applied fluorides have been successfully used to inhibit the formation of dental caries in this population. However, because intensive daily self-application is required, compliance is an issue. The intraoral fluoride-releasing system (IFRS) containing a sodium fluoride core is a newly developed, sustained-release, passive drug delivery system that does not require patient involvement except for periodic replacement, thus reducing the effect of patient compliance on its effectiveness in dental caries prevention. Twenty-two head and neck cancer patients from U. T. M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, with radiation-induced xerostomia, were entered into a pilot study to contrast the daily home use of a 0.4% stannous fluoride-gel-containing tray (control group) to IFRS (study group) with respect to tolerability and adherence, and to obtain information on relative caries preventive efficacy. Participants were stratified on the basis of radiation exposure and randomly assigned to treatment with either IFRS or stannous fluoride gel. Patients in both groups were fitted with two IFRS retainers and also were instructed to use a 1100-ppm fluoride conventional sodium fluoride dentifrice twice daily. The study was conducted as a single-blinded, parallel-cell trial. Pre-existing carious lesions were restored prior to the beginning of the study. The efficacy variable was determined by the mean number of new or recurrent decayed surfaces. Patients were examined for caries 4, 8, 12, 24, 36, and 48 weeks after initiation of treatment. Reports of adverse reactions were based on information volunteered by patients and that were elicited during interviews. At baseline, the resting and stimulated salivary flow rates (g/5min) were significantly greater in the control group than in the study group (p<0.05). Patients in the control group had received significantly more radiation than those in the test group (68Gy vs. 60Gy; p=0.047). No marked differences in follow-up new and recurrent caries were found between the stannous fluoride gel control and IFRS groups during the study period. The rate of new or recurrent carious lesions in the group treated with the fluoride gel was slightly lower than in the IFRS group, based on carious lesions at the baseline examination (Poisson mean number of new or recurrent carious lesions for the control group=0.55 per year vs. 0.83 per year for the study group, p=0.705; odds ratio of the occurrence of any new or recurrent caries during follow-up for control group vs. the study group=0.80; p=0.781). This pilot study revealed that the IFRS was well-tolerated and safe in this study population associated with minimal complications during the duration of this study and was comparable in efficacy to a SnF(2) gel in preventing caries development. The IFRS provided similar rates of control for caries formation to a fluoride-gel-containing tray. The IFRS is designed to release a daily dose of 0.12mg of sodium fluoride, which can be evenly distributed throughout the oral cavity for a single application of 4 months. It would be more convenient than the daily home application of a tray of 0.4% stannous fluoride or 1.1% sodium fluoride gel, and avoids the problem of variable patient compliance.

