Phase II study of efficacy and safety of bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy or erlotinib compared with chemotherapy alone for treatment of recurrent or refractory non small-cell lung cancer.

PURPOSE Bevacizumab, a humanized anti-vascular endothelial growth factor monoclonal antibody, and erlotinib, a reversible, orally available epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, have demonstrated evidence of a survival benefit in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A single-arm phase I and II study of bevacizumab plus erlotinib demonstrated encouraging efficacy, with a favorable safety profile.
PATIENTS AND METHODS A multicenter, randomized phase II trial evaluated the safety of combining bevacizumab with either chemotherapy (docetaxel or pemetrexed) or erlotinib and preliminarily assessed these combinations versus chemotherapy alone, as measured by progression-free survival (PFS). All patients had histologically confirmed nonsquamous NSCLC that had progressed during or after one platinum-based regimen.
RESULTS One hundred twenty patients were randomly assigned and treated. No unexpected adverse events were noted. Fewer patients (13%) in the bevacizumab-erlotinib arm discontinued treatment as a result of adverse events than in the chemotherapy alone (24%) or bevacizumab-chemotherapy (28%) arms. The incidence of grade 5 hemorrhage in patients receiving bevacizumab was 5.1%. Although not statistically significant, relative to chemotherapy alone, the risk of disease progression or death was 0.66 (95% CI, 0.38 to 1.16) among patients treated with bevacizumab-chemotherapy and 0.72 (95% CI, 0.42 to 1.23) among patients treated with bevacizumab-erlotinib. One-year survival rate was 57.4% for bevacizumab-erlotinib and 53.8% for bevacizumab-chemotherapy compared with 33.1% for chemotherapy alone.
CONCLUSION Results for PFS and overall survival favor combination of bevacizumab with either chemotherapy or erlotinib over chemotherapy alone in the second-line setting. No unexpected safety signals were noted. The rate of fatal pulmonary hemorrhage was consistent with previous bevacizumab trials. The toxicity profile of the bevacizumab-erlotinib combination is favorable compared with either chemotherapy-containing group.

