Randomized, comparative study of the efficacy and safety of artesunate plus amodiaquine, administered as a single daily intake versus two daily intakes in the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria.

BACKGROUND Artesunate plus amodiaquine is a coblistered ACT, given as a single daily intake. It has been suggested that, in view of the number of tablets to be taken (particularly in adults), it may be possible to improve compliance by allowing patients to divide the daily dose. The objectives of this randomized, comparative, open-label, multicentre study, conducted in Senegal and in Cameroon in 2005, was to demonstrate the non-inferiority and to compare the safety of artesunate plus amodiaquine, as a single daily intake versus two daily intakes.
METHODS A three-day treatment period and 14-day follow-up period was performed in any subject weighting more than 10 kg, presenting with a malaria paroxysm confirmed by parasitaemia > or = 1,000/microl, after informed consent. Patients were randomly allocated into one of the two regimens, with dosage according to bodyweight range. All products were administered by an authorized person, blinded to both the investigating physician and the biologist. The primary endpoint was an adequate response to treatment on D14 (WHO definition). The two-sided 90% confidence interval of the difference was calculated on intent to treat (ITT) population; the acceptance limit for non-inferiority was 3%. The safety was evaluated by incidence of adverse events.
RESULTS Three-hundred and sixteen patients were included in the study. The two patient groups were strictly comparable on D0. The adequate responses to treatment were similar for the two treatment regimens on D14, PCR-corrected (99,4% in the one-daily intake group versus 99,3% in the comparative group). The statistical analyses demonstrated the non-inferiority of administering artesunate/amodiaquine as two intakes. The drug was well tolerated. The main adverse events were gastrointestinal disorders (2.5%) and pruritus (2.5%); safety profiles were similar in the two groups.
CONCLUSION This pilot study confirms the efficacy and good tolerability of artesunate plus amodiaquine, administrated either in one or in two daily intakes.

