Beneficial effects of a diabetes specific formula on insulin sensitivity and free fatty acid in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

BACKGROUND This prospective, randomized, controlled study was designed to investigate the effects of a diabetes specific formula (Diason low energy: 313.8 kJ/100 ml), compared with a standard formula, on insulin sensitivity, serum C peptide, serum lipids and free fatty acid (FFA) in type 2 diabetics.
METHODS In total of 71 type 2 diabetics completed the study. Enteral formulas were given orally as the sole source of nutrition to the subjects for 6 days. Venous blood samples (0.5, 1, 2, 3 hours) were collected at day-7 after a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), day 1 after a standard test meal (1673.6 kJ) and after 6 days of either the test diabetes specific formula or a standard formula. Plasma glucose, serum insulin, C peptide and lipids were measured.
RESULTS After the intervention period, the diabetes specific formula resulted in a significantly lower postprandial rise in blood glucose concentrations at 0.5 hour (P < 0.05) and 1 hour (P < 0.01); significantly lower peak height of plasma glucose (P = 0.05); significantly lower plasma insulin concentrations at 0.5 hour (P < 0.01), 1 hour (P < 0.01) and 2 hours (P < 0.01); and a significantly lower plasma insulin peak compared to controls; both OGTT and a standard test meal (P < 0.05). The glucose and insulin area under the curve after the diabetes specific formula compared to the standard formula were significantly lower. The C peptide level was lower after 6 days of both nutrition formulas compare to 75 g OGTT, but not different from the standard mixed meal. Both formulas were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS In summary the diabetes specific formula with a relatively high monounsaturated fatty acid and high multi fiber proportion significantly improved glycemic control. On top of this, the insulin sensitivity (HOMA-IS) was significantly improved and may therefore directly improve the impact on long term complications. The disease specific formula should therefore be the preferred option to be used by diabetic and hyperglycemic patients in need of nutritional support.

