Polycystic ovary syndrome and cardiovascular risk in young patients treated with drospirenone-ethinylestradiol or contraceptive vaginal ring. A prospective, randomized, pilot study.

OBJECTIVE To compare the effects of a pill containing drospirenone with those of a combined contraceptive vaginal ring on the lipid and carbohydrate metabolism and on the surrogate markers of arterial function.
SETTING Bologna University School of Medicine.
PATIENT(S) Thirty-seven women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) were randomly submitted to drospirenone+ethinylestradiol (group I; n=19) or combined contraceptive vaginal ring (group II; n=18) therapy. The duration of the study was 6 months.
INTERVENTION(S) The effect of treatments was assessed after 6 months of therapy.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S) Utero-ovarian ultrasound analysis and color Doppler evaluation of uterine and stromal ovarian arteries. In addition, analysis of brachial artery flow-mediated vasodilatation and 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring were performed. Fasting blood samples were drawn for testing biochemical and hormonal parameters and nitrites/nitrates.
RESULT(S) Both treatments improved hirsutism, hyperandrogenemia, and ultrasound and color Doppler ovarian parameters. Both drospirenone+ethinylestradiol or contraceptive vaginal ring induced a slight but significant increase of diurnal and 24-hour blood pressure. Although both therapies worsened the lipid profile, the oral pill administration was associated with a more evident increase of circulating triglycerides. The 6-month treatment with the vaginal ring significantly improved the area under the curve for glucose, insulin, and C-peptide, whereas the drospirenone+ethinylestradiol pill induced an increase in the insulinogenic index and homeostatic model assessment estimate for insulin resistance values.
CONCLUSION(S) Vaginal hormonal contraception appears to be preferable to oral ethinylestradiol + drospirenone administration in hyperinsulinemic patients with PCOS.

