Translucency of zirconia copings made with different CAD/CAM systems.

STATEMENT OF PROBLEM Zirconia cores are reported to be less translucent than glass, lithium disilicate, or alumina cores. This could affect the esthetic appearance and the clinical choices made when using zirconia-based restorations.
PURPOSE The purpose of this in vitro study was to evaluate the translucency of zirconia copings for single crowns fabricated using different CAD/CAM systems, using lithium disilicate glass ceramic as a control.
MATERIAL AND METHODS Using impressions made from a stainless steel complete-crown master die, 9 stone cast replicas were fabricated, numbered, and distributed into 8 ceramic ZrO(2) CAD/CAM system groups (Lava Frame 0.3 and 0.5, IPS e.max ZirCAD, VITA YZ, Procera AllZircon, Digizon, DC Zircon, and Cercon Base) and to a lithium disilicate glass-ceramic control group (IPS e.max Press) using a simple computer-generated randomization method. From each die, the manufacturer's authorized milling centers supplied 5 copings per group without applying any dying technique to the ceramic base material. The copings were prepared to allow for a 40-mum cement layer and were of different thicknesses according to system specifications. Translucency was measured by the direct transmission method with a digital photoradiometer mounted in a dark chamber. The light source was a 150-W halogen lamp beam. Measurements were repeated 3 times for each specimen. Data obtained were analyzed using 1-way ANOVA and the Bonferroni multiple comparison test (alpha=.05).
RESULTS Among ZrO(2) copings, Lava (0.3 mm and 0.5 mm thick) showed the highest (P<.05) values of translucency measured as light flow units (3.572 + or - 018 x 10(3) lx and 3.181 + or - 0.13 x 10(3) lx, respectively). These values represent 71.7% and 63.9%, respectively, of the glass-ceramic control group (4.98 x 10(3) lx).
CONCLUSIONS All ZrO(2) copings demonstrated different levels of light transmission, with the 2 Lava specimens showing the highest values. Translucency of zirconia copings was significantly lower (P=.001) than that of the lithium disilicate glass-ceramic control.

