Patients appreciation for information on anesthesia and anxiolysis in dentistry.

AIM The research regards information on anesthesia to patients undergoing oral surgery. Every patient evaluated the information received at the end of the preoperative visit and in the postoperative period.
METHODS One hundred-fifty dental patients were asked about the most appreciated information received in the preoperative visit on the anxiolytic technique, local anesthesia and treatment of the perioperative pain. Afterwards the patients had to report on their reaction to the content of the preoperative visit and information quality. On a phone interview they had to evaluate their appreciation of the anxiolytic technique, their perception during loco-regional anesthesia and incidence of pain and edema.
RESULTS The most appreciated details were those on the intervention, pharmacologic treatment, postoperative complicances, postoperative pain and operative competence; less appreciated were those on loco-regional anesthesia, duration of the intervention, anxiolytic techniques, hospital reception and permanence in the hospital. Ninety-eight percent of the patients considered to have been adequately informed on a context judged to be extraordinary (99.3%), 96.6% indicated the information as necessary, 98.6% appreciated the treatment of the intraoperative and postoperative (99.3%) pain and 99.3% the anxiolytic treatment. On the telephone interview, 100% of patients expressed satisfaction for the experienced intraoperative tranquillity, 91.3% complained for not having received in the past a similar preoperative visit, 99.3% wished a diffused application of the information. The loco-regional anesthesia was associated to psychological detachment in 84% of the cases and the incidence of postoperative pain was of 36%.
CONCLUSION The information on the anxiolytic techniques, loco-regional anesthesia, treatment of perioperative pain and postoperative distress was enthusiastically accepted and albeit initially induced feelings of astonishment resulted to be appreciated and preferred in the whole of the patients.

