Removal of humoral mediators and the effect on the survival of septic patients by hemoperfusion with neutral microporous resin column.

The aim of this study is to evaluate the impact of neutral microporous resin hemoperfusion on hemodynamic improvement, removal of inflammatory cytokines, and mortality in critical care patients with severe sepsis. Forty-four patients with severe sepsis or septic shock were randomized to HA type hemoperfusion treatment (N=24) or standard therapy (N=20). Those undergoing hemoperfusion treatment received HA330 hemoperfusion. We measured the plasma concentrations of IL-6 and IL-8 at the start of every hemoperfusion treatment, and the following parameters were compared between the control group and the hemoperfusion group on days 3, 7, and 14: hemodynamics (cardiac index, systemic vascular resistance index, heart rate, and mean arterial pressure); change of hematology and coagulation function; organ function; and the sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score. Hospital, 28-day, and ICU mortality were also observed. Patients treated with HA hemoperfusion showed a significant removal of plasma IL-6 and IL-8 over time while in the study. Patients in the HA group also demonstrated significant increases in cardiac index, systemic vascular resistant index, fast withdrawal of vasoactive agents and decreases in heart rate compared with the controls at days 3 and 7. Although there was no significant difference between the groups in organ dysfunction as assessed by SOFA scores from day 0 (baseline) to day 7, significant improvement can be demonstrated in the hemoperfusion group at day 14. There was no significant difference between the groups in 28-day mortality, hospital mortality, or length of hospital stay, but ICU mortality and the length of ICU stay in the HA group were markedly reduced. Hemoperfusion treatment using the HA type cartridge in sepsis is safe and it may improve organ dysfunction, ICU mortality, and shorten the length of ICU stay. Clinical significant removal of inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 and IL-8 from circulation by hemoperfusion may contribute to improving a patient's outcome in an ICU.

