[Simvastatin versus gemfibrozil in the treatment of primary hypercholesterolemia in hypertensive patients treated with hydrochlorothiazide].

Recent pharmacological studies confirmed the role of hypercholesterolemia in the pathogenesis of coronary atherosclerosis. A 10% reduction in cholesterol levels can reduce the risk of coronary heart disease by 15%. However many hypercholesterolemic patients often suffer from arterial hypertension and drugs such as thiazide diuretics cause an imbalance in lipid metabolism. The efficacy and the tolerability of simvastatin (a inhibitor of HGM-CoA reductase) with that of gemfibrozil (a fibric acid derivative, which can reduce the VLDL level) were compared in a placebo-controlled study in 2 groups of patients with primary hypercholesterolemia and mild-to-moderate essential hypertension treated with hydrochlorothiazide. After 10 weeks standard hypolipidemic diet and hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg od) therapy, 30 patients whose cholesterol levels were still greater than or equal to 250 mg/100 ml and whose diastolic blood pressure was less than 95 mmHg were randomized to one of the following treatments: simvastatin, 20 mg od, gemfibrozil, 600 mg bid or placebo, while continuing dietetic and diuretic treatment. After 24 weeks treatment, simvastatin induced a 37% reduction in cholesterol plasma levels, a 9% increase of HDL and a 16% reduction of LDL. APO-A1 showed a 4% increase, while APO-B showed a 3% reduction. Gemfibrozil induced a 20% reduction in plasma triglycerides and a 13% decrease in plasma cholesterol, with a significant 19% increase in HDL and a 11% reduction in LDL. No significant variations in any of the lipid parameters monitored were observed in the placebo group. Treatment with simvastatin or gemfibrozil in hypertensive patients in hydrochlorothiazide monotherapy can reduce total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol plasma levels, while significantly increasing HDL plasma levels compared to placebo. Simvastatin, however, resulted more efficient than gemfibrozil on total cholesterol or cholesterol fractions.

