Immunologic response after laparoscopic colon cancer operation within an enhanced recovery program.

OBJECTIVE It has been demonstrated that colon operation combined with fast-track (FT) surgery and laparoscopic technique can shorten the length of hospital stay, accelerate recovery of intestinal function, and reduce the occurrence of post-operative complications. However, there are no reports regarding the combined effects of FT colon operation and laparoscopic technique on humoral inflammatory cellular immunity.
METHODS This was a prospective, controlled study. One hundred sixty-three colon cancer patients underwent the traditional protocol and open operation (traditional open group, n=42), the traditional protocol and laparoscopic operation (traditional laparoscopic group, n=40), the FT protocol and open operation (FT open group, n=41), or the FT protocol and laparoscopic operation (FT laparoscopic group, n=40). Blood samples were taken prior to operation as well as on days 1, 3, and 5 after operation. The number of lymphocyte subpopulations was determined by flow cytometry, and serum interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein levels were measured. Post-operative hospital stay, post-operative morbidity, readmission rate, and in-hospital mortality were recorded.
RESULTS Compared with open operation, laparoscopic colon operation effectively inhibited the release of post-operative inflammatory factors and yielded good protection via post-operative cell immunity. FT surgery had a better protective role with respect to the post-operative immune system compared with traditional peri-operative care. Inflammatory reactions, based on interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein levels, were less intense following FT laparoscopic operation compared to FT open operation; however, there were no differences in specific immunity (CD3+ and CD4+ counts, and the CD4+/CD8+ ratio) during these two types of surgical procedures. Post-operative hospital stay in patients randomized to the FT laparoscopic group was significantly shorter than in the other three treatment groups (P<0.01). Post-operative complications in patients who underwent FT laparoscopic treatment were less than in the other three treatment groups (P<0.05). There were no significant differences between the four treatment groups regarding readmission rate and in-hospital mortality.
CONCLUSIONS The laparoscopic technique and FT surgery rehabilitation program effectively inhibited release of post-operative inflammatory factors with a reduction in peri-operative trauma and stress, which together played a protective role on the post-operative immune system. Combining two treatment measures during colon operation produced better protective effects via the immune system. The beneficial clinical effects support that the better-preserved post-operative immune system may also contribute to the improvement of post-operative results in FT laparoscopic patients.

