[Effects of transcutaneous electrical stimulation of auricular Shenmen point on postoperative nausea and vomiting and patient-controlled epidural analgesia in cesarean section].

OBJECTIVE To investigate the effects of transcutaneous electrical stimulation of auricular Shenmen point on postoperative nausea and vomiting and patient-controlled epidural analgesia in cesarean section.
METHODS After IRB approval and informed consent, one hundred and eighty singleton primiparas undergoing elective cesarean section, in Qingdao Municipal Hospital, and Qingdao Hiser Medical Center, from November 2011 to March 2012, were randomly assigned to three groups: transcutaneous electrical stimulation of auricular Shenmen point group (group A, n = 60), transcutaneous electrical stimulation of auricular Eye point group (group B, n = 60) and control group (group C, n = 60). Women of group A received transcutaneous electrical stimulation of auricular Shenmen point (frequency 1.5 HZ) at the time of preoperation, 4, 10 and 22 hours of postoperation for 30 minutes. The strength was controlled by themselves. Women of group B received stimulation of auricular Eye point as group A. Women of group C received pressurization and connected line were the same with group A, but without electrical stimulation. The following indexes was observed: the incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) for 48 hours; the rate of metoclopramide; the visual analogue scale (VAS) score of rest pain, uterine contration pain and dynamic pain at the time of postoperation for 6, 12, 24 and 48 hours (T(1)-T(4)); the total number and effective compressions number of patient-controlled epidural analgesia(PCEA);the dose of analgesia mixture; the anal exhaust time; the volume of postoperative bleeding for 6 hours of postoperation and the other side effects.
RESULTS Compared with group B and group C, the incidence of PONV, the rate of metoclopramide, the VAS score at the time T(1)-T(4), the total number and effective compressions number of PCEA, the ratio of the total number with effective compressions number and the dose of analgesia mixture were decreased in group A (P < 0.05), but no difference compared group B with group C (P > 0.05). The anal exhaust time and the volume of postoperative bleeding for 6 hours of postoperation were no difference in the three groups (P > 0.05). No other side effects were observed.
CONCLUSION Transcutaneous electrical stimulation of auricular Shenmen point can reduce the incidence of PONV and improves analgesia effect of PCEA in postoperation of cesarean section.

