Pregnancy outcome and glycemic control in women with type 1 diabetes: a retrospective comparison between CSII and MDI treatment.

AIM Present study was aimed to evaluate glycemic control and maternal-fetal outcome in pregnant type 1 diabetic patient treated with continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) or multiple daily injections of insulin (MDI).
PATIENTS AND METHODS A retrospective observational study included thirty-four pregnant type 1 diabetic patients. Patients were divided into two group, CSII treated group (n=14) and MDI treated group (n=20). The HbA1c level and maternal-fetal outcome were evaluated in both the treatment group. Outcome parameters such as glycemic control (HbA1c), hypoglycemic events, time and mode of delivery and labor results (abortion, premature labor, perinatal mortality, neonatal weight, Apgar score, neonatal hypoglycaemia, presence of congenital abnormalities) were analyzed.
RESULTS Pregnancy outcome and glycemic control in pregnant type 1 diabetic patients treated with CSII and MDI were evaluated and compared. Two groups were compared for their epidemiological parameters, although patients on CSII treatment had longer duration of diabetes compared to MDI treated group. Reduction in HbA1c level was higher in CSII treated patients at first (CSII: 0.9% vs MDI: 0.46%), second (CSII: 1.58% vs MDI: 0.78%) and third trimester (CSII: 1.74% vs MDI: 1.09%) of pregnancy compared to MDI treated patients. Duration of pregnancy and new born baby weight were founded similar in both group. Moreover, the rate of abortion, preterm labor, cesarean section and hypoglycemia in new born were founded less in CSII treated group compared to MDI treated group and Apgar score was significantly (p<0.05) higher in CSII treated group compared to MDI treated group.
CONCLUSION Results of present study revealed that the CSII gives better glycemic control and pregnancy outcome in pregnant type 1 diabetic patients compared to MDI treatment. CSII also decreases the daily insulin requirement compared MDI.

