[Treating rheumatoid arthritis patients of Shen deficiency and cold invading syndrome by bushen quhan zhiwang decoction combined methotrexate: an evaluation of clinical efficacy and safety].

OBJECTIVE To evaluate the clinical efficacy and safety of bushen quhan zhiwang decoction (BQZD) combined methotrexate (MTX) in treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS A prospective, randomized controlled study was carried out. RA patients of Shen deficiency and cold invading syndrome in the treatment group (120 cases) were treated with BQZD and MTX (10 mg/week), while those in the control group (120 cases) were treated with MTX (10 mg/week) alone. The therapeutic course for all was 24 weeks. The efficacy and safety indices were evaluated at the baseline and 24 weeks after treatment, including clinical signs and symptoms, condition assessment, Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ), disease activity index 28 (DAS28), laboratory parameters of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), safety indicators, and Chinese medical syndrome integrals.
RESULTS The total effective rate was 80. 0% in the treatment group, better than that of the control group (66.7%), showing statistical difference (P <0.01). In the two groups significant improvement of clinical signs and symptoms, ESR, CRP, visual analogue scale (VAS) by both physicians and patients, HAQ, DAS28, and Chinese medical syndrome integrals after treatment were shown (P <0.01). Better effects were obtained in the treatment group in lessening tender joint numbers and swollen joint numbers, VAS by both physicians and patients, DAS28, and Chinese medical syndrome integrals (P < 0.05). Besides, adverse reactions occurred less in the treatment group than in the control group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS BQZD had roles in relieving symptoms, improving joint functions, signs, ESR, and CRP. It was an effective herb for RA patients of Shen deficiency and cold invading syndrome. It could enhance the efficacy and reduce adverse reactions of MTX through synergistic effects with MTX.

