[Treatment of autism children: observation on efficacy of behavior training with retention of needles on head].

OBJECTIVE To observe the effect difference of behavior training with head needling retention and behavior training after acupuncture for autism children.
METHODS Sixty qualified autism children were divided randomly into simultaneous head needling retention and behavior training group (trial group) and behavior training after acupuncture treatment group (control group) with 30 case in each group. Retention needles on the head with simultaneous behavior training was applied for the trial group. The main acupoints included Sishen Xue, Dingshen Sanxue (3 points for mental tranquilization), Nao Sanxue (3 points for the function of brain), Shou Zhisanxue (3 points for mental activities on hand) and Zozhi Sonxue (3 points for mental activities on foot). Other points were combined according to conditions of patients. Needles on the 4 extremities were withdrawn first after 30 minutes, needles on head were remained during behavior training. While behavior training was applied to the control group when acupuncture treatment was completely accomplished. Treatments were applied once a day to both groups. And 3 months was taken as one observation cycle. Estimation was made on therapeutic effect and developing level of autism children with CARS and PEP.
RESULTS The total effective rate of the trial group was 83.3% (25/30), better than 66.7% (20/30) of the control group (P < 0.05). The CARS scores of both groups declined after the treatment. And the score of trail group was lower than the control group (all P < 0.05). While the PEP scores of both groups increased, and the score of trail group was higher than the control group (all P < 0.05). The increasing level of scores of cognitive understanding and cognitive expression were all better than the control group (all P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION The effect of behavior training with head needle retention on autism children is better than behavior training after acupuncture treatment, especially in enhancing cognition understanding and cognition expression.

