Immunological changes after minimally invasive or conventional esophageal resection for cancer: a randomized trial.

BACKGROUND This study was performed as a substudy analysis of a randomized trial comparing conventional open esophagectomy [open surgical technique (OE)] by thoracotomy and laparotomy with minimally invasive esophagectomy [minimally invasive procedure (MIE)] by thoracoscopy and laparoscopy. This additional analysis focuses on the immunological changes and surgical stress response in these two randomized groups of a single center.
METHODS Patients with a resectable esophageal cancer were randomized to OE (n = 13) or MIE (n = 14). All patients received neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. The immunological response was measured by means of leukocyte counts, HLA-DR expression on monocytes, the acute-phase response by means of C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin-8 (IL-8), and the stress response was measured by cortisol, growth hormone, and prolactin. All parameters were determined at baseline (preoperatively) and 24, 72, 96, and 168 h postoperatively.
RESULTS Significant differences between the two groups were seen in favor of the MIE group with regard to leukocyte counts, IL-8, and prolactin at 168 h (1 week) postoperatively. For HLA-DR expression, IL-6, and CRP levels, there were no significant differences between the two groups, although there was a clear rise in levels upon operation in both groups.
CONCLUSION In this substudy of a randomized trial comparing minimally invasive and conventional open esophagectomies for cancer, significantly better preserved leukocyte counts and IL-8 levels were observed in the MIE group compared to the open group. Both findings can be related to fewer respiratory infections found postoperatively in the MIE group. Moreover, significant differences in the prolactin levels at 168 h after surgery imply that the stress response is better preserved in the MIE group. These findings indicate that less surgical trauma could lead to better preserved acute-phase and stress responses and fewer clinical manifestations of respiratory infections.

