Low-fluence photodynamic therapy versus ranibizumab for chronic central serous chorioretinopathy: one-year results of a randomized trial.

PURPOSE To compare the efficacy and safety between low-fluence photodynamic therapy (PDT) and the intravitreal ranibizumab in the treatment of chronic central serous chorioretinopathy (CSC).
DESIGN Prospective, randomized, single-center, parallel-arm, controlled trial.
PARTICIPANTS Thirty-four eyes of 32 patients with chronic CSC with >6 months' duration of symptoms or recurrent CSC were randomly placed into the low-fluence PDT group (n = 18) or the ranibizumab group (n = 16).
INTERVENTION The patients underwent a single session of low-fluence PDT or 3 consecutive monthly injections of ranibizumab. Rescue treatment was available from month 3 if the subretinal fluid (SRF) persisted or recurred after primary treatment; low-fluence PDT was given to the ranibizumab group and intravitreal ranibizumab to the low-fluence PDT group.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES The primary outcome was the proportion of eyes with complete resolution of SRF without rescue treatment. Secondary outcomes included the mean changes in logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), central retinal thickness (CRT), and angiographic findings from baseline to 12 months.
RESULTS At month 12, 16 eyes (88.9%) of the low-fluence PDT group maintained complete resolution of SRF without rescue treatment versus 2 eyes (12.5%) in the ranibizumab group (P <0.001). Two eyes (11.1%) in the low-fluence PDT group and 11 eyes (68.8%) in the ranibizumab group met the criteria for rescue treatment (P = 0.001). In the low-fluence PDT group, the mean decrease in CRT from baseline was significantly greater than that in the ranibizumab group until month 6 (P <0.05), but the differences became insignificant thereafter. The improvement in BCVA from baseline was superior in the low-fluence PDT group to that in the ranibizumab group, but the differences were not statistically significant except at month 3 (P = 0.025). On indocyanine green angiography, a significantly greater proportion of the low-fluence PDT group (16 eyes; 88.9%) showed a marked reduction in choroidal hyperpermeability after primary treatment than that of the ranibizumab group (0 eyes; P <0.001). No serious adverse events related to the drugs or procedures were observed.
CONCLUSIONS This study represents the overall superiority of low-fluence PDT compared with intravitreal ranibizumab in the treatment of chronic CSC.

