[Case-controll study on the synergistic effects of electroacupuncture on knee osteoarthritis after arthroscopic debridement].

OBJECTIVE To study the synergistic effects of electroacupuncture on the treatment of knee osteoarthritis after arthroscopic debridement.
METHODS From May 2008 to July 2010, 78 patients with knee osteoarthritis were randomly divided into two groups. There were 42 patients in the experimental group, including 16 males and 26 females, ranging in age from 41 to 63 years, with an average of (53.62 +/- 6.53) years; the disease course ranged from 8 to 24 months, with an average of (10.35 +/- 6.42) months. The patients were treated with arthroscopic debridement combined with electroacupuncture after operation. There were 36 patients in the control group, including 14 males and 22 females, ranging in age from 40 to 62 years, with an average of (54.34 +/- 7.67) years; the disease course ranged from 6 to 25 months, with an average of (11.94 +/- 5.13) months. Those patients were treated only with arthroscopic debridment. All the patients performed isometric quadriceps femoris contraction exercise and knee flexion and extension activities after operation. The visual analog scale(VAS) score and Lysholm knee score were used to evaluate the therapeutic effects.
RESULTS All the patients were followed up, and the duration ranged from 12 to 30 months, with an average of 15.6 months. At the final follow-up, VAS score was significantly decreased, and the Lysholm score, except for the item demanding for support, significantly increased, compared with those before surgery respectively in both groups. There was significant difference in VAS score between two groups after treatment. As to Lysholm score, there were significant differences in limp, pain, swelling, stair activity and squat, but there were no significant differences in items of interlocking and instability between two groups after treatment.
CONCLUSION Electroacupuncture can effectively improve the clinical symptoms and knee joint's motor function of knee joints in patients with knee osteoarthritis, as well as the synergistic effects on the treatment of knee osteoarthritis after arthroscopic debridement, leading to a much better long-term therapeutic effect with respect of improving the function of knee joint. This therapy, combined with traditional Chinese medicine and Western Medicine,is worth of clinical application in the treatment of knee osteoarthritis.

