Prospective randomized comparison between transperitoneal laparoscopic pyeloplasty and retroperitoneoscopic pyeloplasty for primary ureteropelvic junction obstruction.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES To compare laparoscopic transperitoneal versus retroperitoneoscopic pyeloplasty for primary ureteropelvic junction obstruction in a prospective randomized manner and assess overall results with long-term follow-up.
METHODS In this prospective study, from 2008 to 2012, 112 cases of primary ureteropelvic junction obstruction were randomized in a 1:1 ratio into 2 groups. Group I included patients who underwent transperitoneal laparoscopic pyeloplasty, and group II consisted of patients who underwent retroperitoneoscopic laparoscopic pyeloplasty. Demographic and clinical characteristics and postoperative and operative data were collected and analyzed. The statistical analysis was performed with the Fisher exact test, χ2 test, and Mann-Whitney U test for independent groups, and P<.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS The total operative time and intracorporeal suturing time were significantly higher in group II than in group I (P<.001). The visual analog scale score for pain on postoperative day 1 and the requirement for tramadol were significantly higher in group I than in group II (P=.004). The hospital stay and the rate of temporary ileus were significantly greater (P<.036 and P<.02, respectively) in group I than in group II. The success rate of transperitoneal laparoscopic pyeloplasty versus retroperitoneoscopic laparoscopic pyeloplasty was 96.4% versus 96.6% with a mean follow-up period of 30.75±4.85 months versus 30.99±5.59 months (P<.88).
CONCLUSION Transperitoneal laparoscopic pyeloplasty is associated with significantly greater postoperative pain, a higher tramadol dose, a higher rate of ileus, and a longer hospital stay in comparison with retroperitoneoscopic laparoscopic pyeloplasty. Although the operative time for retroperitoneoscopic laparoscopic pyeloplasty is significantly longer, the success rate remains the same for both procedures.

