Effects of stellate ganglionic block on hemodynamic changes and intrapulmonary shunt in perioperative patients with esophageal cancer.

OBJECTIVE The aim of this study was to observe the effects of stellate ganglion block (SGB) on hemodynamic changes and intrapulmonary shunt during one-lung ventilation (OLV).
PATIENTS AND METHODS Thirty ASA class I-II patients undergoing elective esophageal surgery were randomly divided into two groups: general anesthesia group (group N, n=15) and general anesthesia combined SGB group (group S, n=15), patients in group S were received left SGB before induction. Radial artery was cannulated for arterial blood pressure (ABP) monitoring and blood sampling and Swan-Ganz catheter was position in the pulmonary artery via right internal jugular vein under local anesthesia. ECG, MAP, HR, CVP, continuous cardiac output (CCO) index and BIS were continuously monitored during anesthesia. General anesthesia was induced with propofol 1.5-2.0 mg/kg, sufentanil 0.4 μg/kg, and Rocuronium 0.6-0.9 mg/kg. Endobronchial occluder was placed blindly after tracheal indubation and the correct position was verified by auscultation and fiberoptic bronchoscopy. The patients were mechanically ventilated. The ventilation conditions were Fio2=100%, VT = 8-10 ml/kg, I: E = 1:2 and respiratory rate was adjusted to maintained PETCO2 at 35-45 mmHg during both two-lung ventilation (TLV) and OLV. Anesthesia was maintained with continuous infusion of propofol 4-10 mg/kg·h, sufentanil 0.2 μg/kg·h, vecuronium o.1 mg/kg·h, BIS was maintained at 45-55. Blood samples were taken from radial artery and S-G catheter for blood gas analysis at following intervals: during spontaneous breathing when the patient was awake (T0), 1 min after tracheal indubation (T1), 1 min after patient was placed in lateral position (T2) and 15 min after it (T3), 1 min after ribs was braced (T4), 30, 60, 120 min during the course of OLV (T5, T6, T7), the two lungs were ventilated again for 30 min (T8) and Qs/Qt was calculated.
RESULTS SVRI, MAP, HR in group N increased significantly at T1, T2, T4 compared with group S (p < 0.05). Qs/Qt was significantly increased after patient was placed in lateral position and increased further during OLV; the calculated Qs/Qt values were highest at T5· PaO2 was significantly lower after OLV was started and reached the lowest level at T6 then was gradually increasing. There was no significant difference in Qs/Qt and PaO2 at all time points between two groups.
CONCLUSIONS SGB before induction effectively suppress the stress response work as stable blood dynamics and does not affect Qs/Qt and arterial oxygenation during OLV, SGB is a safe technique of anesthesia for general thoracic surgery.

