Baseline distribution of participants with depression and impaired quality of life in the Treatment of Preserved Cardiac Function Heart Failure with an Aldosterone Antagonist Trial.

BACKGROUND Previous studies have demonstrated the psychosocial effect of heart failure in patients with reduced ejection fraction. However, the effects on patients with preserved ejection fraction have not yet been elucidated. This study aimed to determine the baseline characteristics of participants with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction as it relates to impaired quality of life (QOL) and depression, identify predictors of poor QOL and depression, and determine the correlation between QOL and depression.
METHODS AND RESULTS Among patients enrolled in the Treatment of Preserved Cardiac Function Heart Failure With an Aldosterone Antagonist Trial (TOPCAT), 3400 patients completed the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire, 3395 patients completed European QOL 5D Visual Analog Scale, and 1431 patients in United States and Canada completed the Patient Health Questionnaire-9. The mean summary score on the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire was 54.8, and on European QOL 5D Visual Analog Scale, it was 60.3; 27% of patients had moderate to severe depression. Factors associated with better Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire and European QOL 5D Visual Analog Scale via multiple logistic regression analysis were American region, older age, no history of angina pectoris or asthma, no use of hypoglycemic agent, more activity level, and lower New York Heart Association class. Factors associated with depression via multiple logistic regression analysis included younger age, female sex, comorbid angina, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, use of a hypoglycemic agent, lower activity level, higher New York Heart Association class, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor use. There were significant correlations between each of the QOL scores and depression.
CONCLUSIONS Patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, who were younger had higher New York Heart Association class or comorbid angina pectoris, had lower activity levels, lived in Eastern Europe or were taking hypoglycemic agents, were more likely to have impaired QOL and depression.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION URL: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT00094302.

