Analgesic efficacy of piroxicam in the treatment of postoperative pain.

Two randomized, double-blind, single-dose studies were conducted to assess the analgesic efficacy and safety of piroxicam for the treatment of moderate or severe postoperative pain. Study 1 evaluated the analgesic efficacy of piroxicam 20 mg compared with that of codeine sulfate 60 mg and placebo. A final patient population of 149 subjects rated pain intensity and pain relief at one half hour and one hour following treatment and then hourly for six hours, with a global assessment made at the completion of 24 hours. Piroxicam 20 mg was significantly more efficacious than placebo for all analgesic variables, including the sum of the pain intensity differences (SPID), total pain relief (TOTAL), percent SPID, duration of effect, and time to remedication. Codeine 60 mg was significantly superior to placebo for percent SPID and some hourly measures. Piroxicam 20 mg was significantly more effective than codeine 60 mg for percent SPID and a few hourly measures including time to remedication. Study 2 assessed the efficacy of piroxicam 20 mg or 40 mg compared with aspirin 648 mg and placebo. Sixty patients rated their pain intensity and relief hourly for 12 hours and at 24 hours after administration of study medication. Both doses of piroxicam were significantly more effective than placebo from Hours 2 to 12 for pain intensity difference (PID) and relief scores, as well as for SPID and TOTAL. Aspirin was significantly more effective than placebo from Hours 2 to 8 for relief and Hours 2 to 10 for PID as well as SPID and TOTAL. Piroxicam 40 mg was significantly more effective than aspirin 648 mg for SPID, TOTAL, and hourly measures beginning with Hour 6 through Hour 12. Piroxicam 20 mg was significantly better than aspirin for a few hourly measures: Hours 7 to 9 for relief and Hour 7 for PID. In addition, effects of piroxicam 20 mg had a significantly longer duration than aspirin. Similarly, piroxicam 20 mg had a significantly longer time to remedication compared with aspirin and placebo. The results of these studies provide evidence in support of the longer duration of analgesic efficacy of piroxicam compared with codeine or aspirin in patients with postoperative pain.

