Sucralfate overcomes adverse effect of cigarette smoking on duodenal ulcer healing and prolongs subsequent remission.

A unicenter, single-blind, randomized study was conducted on 283 patients with active duodenal ulcer to compare possible factors that may affect healing and relapse in patients treated with a potent antisecretory agent, cimetidine, or a site-protective and cytoprotective agent, sucralfate. The endoscopic healing rates at 4 wk were 76% and 79%, respectively, and cross-over treatment of the failures for a further 4 wk resulted in 68% healing with cimetidine and 69% healing with sucralfate, both differences being not statistically different. Unlike cimetidine, healing by sucralfate was unaffected by cigarette smoking, reluctance to give up smoking, habitual use of alcohol, high maximal acid output, and large ulcer diameter. In particular, the healing rate of smokers treated with sucralfate (82%) was significantly greater than that of smokers treated with cimetidine (63%). Duodenal bulb deformity significantly affected healing in both groups, and was the only offsetting factor identifiable for sucralfate out of 46 factors examined. Of the patients with healed ulcers, 238 participated in a 24-mo follow-up study consisting of interviews at 2-mo intervals and endoscopy at 4-mo intervals or whenever symptoms recurred. The cumulative relapse rate was significantly (p less than 0.007) greater in patients healed with cimetidine than with sucralfate, 50% relapse occurring at 6 and 12 mo, respectively. In both, the cumulative relapse rate was significantly greater in cigarette smokers than in nonsmokers, but smokers and nonsmokers treated with cimetidine relapsed (50% at 4 and 8 mo, respectively) faster than the corresponding smokers and nonsmokers treated with sucralfate (50% at 8 and 18 mo, respectively). Furthermore, in cimetidine- but not sucralfate-healed patients, early ulcer relapse (within 6 mo) was associated with short duration of illness, short remission period, long symptomatic spell, and reluctance to give up smoking. We conclude that smoking adversely affects duodenal ulcer healing by cimetidine and hastens subsequent relapse, and that sucralfate overcomes the adverse effect of smoking on healing as encountered with cimetidine, and results in a subsequent remission period double that of cimetidine.

