Changes in the fatty acid composition of the plasma lipid esters during lipid-lowering treatment with diet, clofibrate and niceritrol. Reduction of the proportion of linoleate by clofibrate but not by niceritrol.

The fatty acid composition of the plasma lipid esters has been studied during lipid-lowering treatment of 95 patients with atherosclerotic disease. During the first two months of the trial only a diet was prescribed. During the ensuing two months either clofibrate or niceritrol, a nicotinic acid ester, was added in a randomized order. During the last two months the second drug was added. The combined treatment with diet, clofibrate and niceritrol caused highly significant serum lipid reductions. The fatty acid composition in the plasma lipid esters was determined in samples from each trial period to measure the degree of dietary adherence. During dietary treatment the relative content of saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids secreased and the polyunsaturated fatty acids increased with an increasing ratio between pulyunsaturated and saturated fatty acids (P/S ratio) in the cholesterol esters and triglycerides. Only minor changes were seen in the phospholipids. The changes caused by the diet were partly reversed by clofibrate while niceritrol did not cause any major changes of the fatty acid composition. Clofibrate treatment coincided with increasing amounts of monounsaturated fatty acids, especially oleate (18 : 1), in the cholesterol esters, triglycerides and phospholipids while there were significant reductions of the content of linoleic (18 : 2) acid in both the cholesterol esters and triglycerides. The 18 : 2/18 : 1 ratio decreased significantly in all the lipid esters analyzed. However, the P/S ratio was not significantly affected, partly because the relative content of saturated fatty acids also tended to decrease during clofibrate treatment. It is concluded that addition of clofibrate treatment to patients who are on a diet enriched with polyunsaturated fats is associated with a change from polyunsaturated to monounsaturated fatty acids in the plasma lipid esters but does not significantly effect the ratio between polyunsaturated and saturated fatty acids. The fatty acid changes caused by clofibrate treatment and counteracted by an increased amount of polyunsaturated fat in the diet.

