Ebeltoft project: baseline data from a five-year randomized, controlled, prospective health promotion study in a Danish population.

BACKGROUND There is increasing political pressure on the medical profession to approach welfare diseases, such as coronary heart disease and diabetes, through prevention. General practitioners are required to offer regular health checks to healthy people, in spite of the lack of scientific evidence for the universal need, usefulness and side effects of such an intervention. Randomized controlled trials are needed.
AIM A study was carried out to investigate people's interest in participating in health checks and in discussions about health with their own general practitioner, participants' health status, the proportion who received health advice following health checks, and the lifestyle goals they set following discussion with their general practitioner. This study reports the baseline data from a five-year randomized, controlled, prospective, population-based study in general practices in Ebeltoft, Denmark.
METHOD All general practitioners from the four practices in Ebeltoft and a random sample of 2000 people aged between 30 and 50 years were invited to participate. Participants were randomly divided into three groups--one control group and two intervention groups. One intervention group were given a health check which included being screened for cardiovascular risk factors, lung and liver function, fitness, sight and hearing and an optional test for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); this group received written feedback from the general practitioner. The other intervention group were also given a health check and written feedback; in addition, they were given the opportunity to attend their general practitioner to discuss preventive health.
RESULTS A total of 1370 people participated in the study (69% response rate). Health advice was given to 76% of 905 participants following health checks. Almost all of the 456 participants (96%) who were offered the opportunity of discussing their health with their general practitioner took up the offer; 64% of the 456 participants reported that they had decided to undertake lifestyle changes. Eleven of those who discussed their health with the doctor were referred to a specialist (2%).
CONCLUSION There was considerable interest in participating in health promotion. Three out of four of those having a health check were given health advice. Two out of three of those offered a health talk with the general practitioner appeared willing to make relevant lifestyle changes. Long-term follow up is needed to determine effects and side effects of health checks and health talks.

