Results of a phase I/II trial of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in very low birthweight neonates: significant induction of circulatory neutrophils, monocytes, platelets, and bone marrow neutrophils.

Neonates, especially those of very low birthweight (VLBW), have an increased risk of nosocomial infections secondary to deficiencies in development. We previously demonstrated that granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) production and mRNA expression from stimulated neonatal mononuclear cells are significantly less than that from adult cells. Recombinant murine GM-CSF administration to neonatal rats has resulted in neutrophilia, increased neutrophil production, and increased survival of pups during experimental Staphylococcus aureus sepsis. In the present study, we sought to determine the safety and biologic response of recombinant human (rhu) GM-CSF in VLBW neonates. Twenty VLBW neonates (500 to 1,500 g), aged < 72 hours, were randomized to receive either placebo (n = 5) or rhuGM-CSF at 5.0 micrograms/kg once per day (n = 5), 5.0 micrograms/kg twice per day (n = 5), or 10 micrograms/kg once per day (n = 5) given via 2-hour intravenous infusion for 7 days. Complete blood counts, differential, and platelet counts were obtained, and tibial bone marrow aspirate was performed on day 8. Neutrophil C3bi receptor expression was measured at 0 and 24 hours. GM-CSF levels were measured by a sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay at 2, 4, 6, 12, and 24 hours after the first dose of rhuGM-CSF. At all doses, rhuGM-CSF was well tolerated, and there was no evidence of grade III or IV toxicity. Within 48 hours of administration, there was a significant increase in the circulating absolute neutrophil count (ANC) at 5.0 micrograms/kg twice per day and 10.0 micrograms/kg once per day, which continued for at least 24 hours after discontinuation of rhuGM-CSF. When the ANC was normalized for each patient's first ANC, there was a significant increase in the ANC on days 6 and 7 at each dose level. By day 7, all tested doses of rhuGM-CSF resulted in an increase in the absolute monocyte count (AMC) compared with placebo-treated neonates. In those receiving rhuGM-CSF 5.0 micrograms/kg twice per day, there was additionally a significant increase in the day 7 and 8 platelet count. Tibial bone marrow aspirates demonstrated a significant increase in the bone marrow neutrophil storage pool (BM NSP) at 5.0 micrograms/kg twice per day and 10.0 micrograms/kg once per day. Neutrophil C3bi receptor expression was significantly increased 24 hours after the first dose of rhuGM-CSF at 5.0 micrograms/kg once per day. The elimination half-life (T1/2) of rhuGM-CSF was 1.4 +/- 0.8 to 3.9 +/- 2.8 hours.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

