[Comparison of complications after intra- and extracapsular cataract extraction with lens implantation. Results of a prospective, randomized, clinical study].

BACKGROUND The postoperative complications of ICCE with ACL implantation are compared with those of ECCE and PCL. Our clinical experience with ICCE and ACL implantation can not confirm the widespread rejection of this method.
PATIENTS AND METHOD A prospective, randomized, clinical study with participation of medical statisticians was performed. A total of 190 patients with ICCE and ACL and 170 patients with ECCE and PCL were followed up for 2 years. The follow-up examinations were performed upon dismission from the hospital, after 6, 12 and 24 months. The data were compiled in a computer program designed for this study and evaluated by the statisticians. The surgical procedures and the surgeons were defined prior to the beginning of patient recruitment.
RESULTS ICCE with ACL shows much less postoperative complications as usually emphasized. There were only 2 (1.2%) of retinal detachment and no case of corneal decompensation. Cystoid macular edema 8 (4.7%), postoperative vitreous prolaps into the anterior chamber 4 (2.3%) and spontaneous complaints of pain 16 (9.4%) occurred in a low percentage after ICCE with ACL. These complications did not occur after ECCE with PCL. The patients with ECCE and PCL showed capsular fibrosis in 48 (28%) making it the most frequent complication of the whole study. 33% of these patients required YAG-laser capsulotomy. Since retinal detachment occurs in 2.5% after YAG-laser capsulotomy we can not regard capsular fibrosis as a totally harmless complication. It is noteworthy that visual acuity is almost identical 1 year after surgery in both methods.
CONCLUSIONS The results of this study show that the evaluation of ICCE with ACL is too negative. The elimination of postoperative complications in this method is more difficult. ECCE with PCL is burdened by frequent capsular fibrosis. Visual acuity is almost the same in both methods 1 years after the operation. ACL-implantation remains our method of choice for secondary implantation in patients with an intact iris diaphragm.

