Comparative efficacy and safety of twice daily fluticasone propionate powder versus placebo in the treatment of moderate asthma.

BACKGROUND Fluticasone propionate, an inhaled corticosteroid with negligible systemic bioavailability via the oral route, is efficacious in the treatment of asthma when administered via metered-dose inhaler.
OBJECTIVE To evaluate the efficacy and safety of inhaled fluticasone propionate powder in patients with moderate asthma previously treated with an inhaled corticosteroid.
METHODS This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multicenter study of 342 adolescent and adult patients with moderate asthma [forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) between 50% and 80% of predicted] treated previously by beclomethasone dipropionate or triamcinolone acetonide. Patients received fluticasone propionate powder 50 micrograms, 100 micrograms, 250 micrograms, or placebo via a breath-actuated inhalation device, the Diskhaler, twice daily for 12 weeks.
RESULTS Patients in the fluticasone propionate groups experienced a mean increase from baseline to endpoint in FEV1 ranging from 0.43 L to 0.47 L. Patients in the placebo group experienced a mean decrease from baseline of 0.22 L (P < .001). The probability of patients remaining in the study over time without developing signs of exacerbating asthma was significantly greater in the fluticasone propionate groups than in the placebo group (P = .001). Asthma symptom scores, supplemental rescue albuterol use, and number of nighttime awakenings due to asthma requiring treatment also improved significantly with all fluticasone propionate treatment regimens compared with placebo (P < .001). There were no statistically significant differences at endpoint among the three fluticasone propionate groups. No serious drug-related adverse events occurred.
CONCLUSIONS Fluticasone propionate powder (50, 100, and 250 micrograms) was well-tolerated and significantly improved lung function in patients with moderate asthma.

