Circulating blood B cells in multiple myeloma: analysis and relationship to circulating clonal cells and clinical parameters in a cohort of patients entered on the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group phase III E9486 clinical trial.

Recent analyses of circulating blood B cells in myeloma have generated controversy concerning the exact levels of these cells and whether they may represent circulating clonal tumor B cells. Previous reports suggested that CD19+ B cells are markedly increased in myeloma patients and that this population shares clonotypic rearrangements with the malignant plasma cell. We studied the numbers of CD19+ B cells by flow cytometry in previously untreated newly diagnosed myeloma patients in Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) phase III trial E9486. There were 628 patients who were eligible for the clinical protocol E9486, but of these 521 were also entered on the companion laboratory study (E9487) and had CD19 data. In comparison with normal controls, the myeloma patients exhibited a marked heterogeneity in the number of circulating CD19+ B cells as detected by flow cytometry. Approximately 20% of patients had significantly increased levels of circulating CD19+ B cells. However, the total CD19+ blood population from myeloma was not significantly different from the median of age-matched, normal controls. Analysis of CD19+ blood cells in relationship to circulating clonal cells was done in 13 myeloma patients using a clonotypic, quantitative allele-specific oligonucleotide-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay. No correlation was found between the numbers of CD19+ B cells (range, 5% to 51%) and PCR estimates of the number of clonal cells in the peripheral blood (range, .009% to 3.6%). Low CD19+ B-cell level (<125 microL) was associated with clinical stage III (P = .033). A significant relationship exists between higher levels (> or = 125/microL) of CD19 cells and longer overall survival (P < .0001). In addition, high CD19 levels also predicted a clinical response and longer event-free survival. There was a strong inverse association between the level of CD19 values at diagnosis and infections within the first 2 months of diagnosis. Importantly, the number of deaths related to infections was significantly greater in the low versus high CD19 group (P < .0202). Also, CD19 is an independent prognostic factor in addition to plasma cell labeling indices, beta2-microglobulin, hemoglobin, and plasmablastic morphology. Patients with infections were more likely to have low levels of CD19+ cells. In summary, higher CD19+ cell levels are a favorable prognostic sign with no apparent relationship to circulating tumor cells. In addition, this analysis strongly suggests that low peripheral blood levels of CD19+ cells are an adverse prognostic sign in myeloma. The CD19+ cell levels in myeloma patients is an important parameter in the overall assessment of these patients.

