Safety and immunogenicity of a combined pentavalent diphtheria, tetanus, acellular pertussis, inactivated poliovirus and Haemophilus influenzae type b-tetanus conjugate vaccine in infants, compared with a whole cell pertussis pentavalent vaccine.

BACKGROUND We compared the safety and immunogenicity of two combined diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis-inactivated poliovirus vaccines containing either acellular (Pa, SmithKline Beecham Biologicals) or whole cell (Pw, Pasteur Merieux Connaught) pertussis components, mixed with a Haemophilus influenzae type b polysaccharide polyribosylribitol phosphate-tetanus conjugate vaccine in an open, randomized study in healthy infants.
DESIGN The combined vaccines were given at 2, 4, 6 and 12 months of age, and serum samples were obtained at ages 2, 6, 7, 12 and 13 months. Adverse events were obtained by diary cards.
RESULTS The Pa group (n = 101) had a clearly lower incidence of both local and systemic adverse events than the Pw group (n = 100). Immunogenicity was comparable for the diphtheria and tetanus components, but significantly superior for pertussis toxin, filamentous hemagglutinin, pertactin and polioviruses 1, 2 and 3 in the Pa group. Both groups had an appropriate response with regard to H. influenzae type b polysaccharide polyribosylribitol phosphate, but the dynamics of the response were significantly different: geometric mean concentrations (micrograms per ml) after the second, third and booster doses were 1.27, 5.06 and 23.12 in the Pa group and 2.72, 6.66 and 13.59 in the Pw group, respectively (P = 0.0002 after second dose; P = 0.0005 after booster).
CONCLUSION The presently studied diphtheria, tetanus, acellular pertussis-H. influenzae b vaccine conjugated to tetanus toxoid combination was at least as immunogenic as the diphtheria, tetanus, whole cell pertussis-H. influenzae b vaccine conjugated to tetanus toxoid combination, with a significantly better safety profile. This is of obvious importance in countries where inactivated poliovirus vaccine is part of the routine infant immunization programs.

