A prospective randomized study of transurethral resection of the prostate and transurethral vaporization of the prostate as a therapeutic alternative in the management of men with BPH.

OBJECTIVE The common goals of new surgical treatment for benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) are to improve subjective and objective symptoms, to decrease the risk of postoperative complications and short hospitalization. Transurethral electrovaporization of the prostate (TUVP) is a new, minimally invasive and a promising alternative to standard transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) in the treatment of BPH. The aim of this study is to compare the efficacy and safety of these two treatment alternatives.
METHODS A prospective randomized trial of 60 patients with symptomatic BPH was performed. Preoperative and postoperative International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS), maximum flow rates (Qmax) and complications were recorded in each patient. The volume of the prostate was measured preoperatively and postoperatively using transrectal ultrasound.
RESULTS Of the 30 patients who underwent TURP, mean hospital stay was 4.5 days. The Foley catheter was removed on postoperative day 4 following surgery. IPSS decreased from 21.6 to 5.2, Qmax increased from 9.2 to 19.2 ml/s at 3 months. Mean prostatic volume at 3 months decreased from 51.7 to 26.2 g, a 49.3% reduction. Of 30 patients undergoing TUVP, mean hospital stay was 2.5 days and the catheter was removed within 2 days following surgery. Postoperative urinary retention did not occur in any patient. IPSS decreased from 19.4 to 4.1 and Qmax increased from 7.9 to 17.7 ml/s at 3 months. Mean prostatic volume decreased from 48.9 to 27.8 g, a 43.1% reduction at 3 months. In the TUVP group, none of the patients required blood transfusions or developed clinical transurethral resection syndrome. There were no major complications. Sphincteric incontinence, urethral strictures or bladder neck contractures were not recorded. At 3 months postoperatively, 13 patients in the TURP group and 7 patients in the TUVP group had retrograde ejaculation.
CONCLUSION Our initial experience of TUVP suggests advantages over conventional TURP through reduced blood loss and shorter hospital stay. It appears to be an effective treatment for BPH; however, long-term results should be evaluated.

