Oxidative DNA damage measured in human lymphocytes: large differences between sexes and between countries, and correlations with heart disease mortality rates.

The 'antioxidant hypothesis' proposes that vitamin C, vitamin E, carotenoids, and other antioxidants occurring in fruit and vegetables afford protection against heart disease and cancer by preventing oxidative damage to lipids and to DNA, respectively. To test elements of this hypothesis, we have measured blood levels of dietary antioxidants, and 8-oxodeoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dG) concentrations in lymphocyte DNA, in healthy men and women from five European countries: France, Ireland, The Netherlands, Spain, and the U.K. Volunteers, aged 25 45, all nonsmokers, gave blood samples before and after a 12-wk carotenoid supplementation regime. Vitamin C was measured in plasma and vitamin E and carotenoids were measured in serum by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). 8-oxo-dG was assayed by HPLC (with coulometric detection) in DNA isolated from lymphocytes from the same blood samples. Mean values were calculated for groups of volunteers at each sampling time according to country, sex, and supplementation (between 9 and 24 individual samples contributing to each mean). We found that 8-oxo-dG levels in lymphocyte DNA vary significantly according to sex and country. A low mean 8-oxo-dG concentration is seen in DNA of women from all five countries, and of men from France and Spain. 8-oxo-dG is significantly higher (up to about threefold) in lymphocyte DNA from men in Ireland and the U.K. Oxidative DNA damage is not significantly affected by carotenoid supplementation; nor is there any association with mean baseline levels of antioxidants, which are generally similar in the five countries. The five countries sampled lie on an axis from northern to southern Europe with a steep gradient in terms of premature heart disease. There is a strong association between premature coronary heart disease mortality in men and the mean levels of 8-oxo-dG for the five countries (r = 0.95, P < 0.01). Women have low coronary heart disease mortality rates, which do not correlate with 8-oxo-dG. In terms of cancer deaths, only colorectal cancer in men shows a significant positive correlation (r = 0.91, P < 0.05), and stomach cancer in women is negatively correlated with DNA oxidation (r = -0.92, P = 0.01).

