BEACOPP, a new dose-escalated and accelerated regimen, is at least as effective as COPP/ABVD in patients with advanced-stage Hodgkin's lymphoma: interim report from a trial of the German Hodgkin's Lymphoma Study Group.

PURPOSE The HD9 trial aims to evaluate whether moderate dose escalation and/or acceleration of standard polychemotherapy is beneficial for advanced-stage Hodgkin's disease (HD). Two variants of a novel bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone (BEACOPP) scheme (standard and escalated dose) are compared with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone (COPP)/doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS The randomized, three-arm trial recruited patients in stages IIB and IIIA with risk factors and stages IIIB and IV. BEACOPP in baseline dose contains all drug dosages of COPP/ABVD (except vincristine and procarbazine) rearranged in a shorter, 3-week cycle. Escalated BEACOPP uses higher doses of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) support. After eight chemotherapy cycles, initial bulky and residual disease is irradiated. The trial is monitored and analyzed by means of a sequential strategy.
RESULTS An interim analysis with 505 assessable patients and a median follow-up of 23 months showed a significant inferiority (according to sequential monitoring strategy) of the COPP/ABVD regimen in progression rate and freedom from treatment failure (FFTF) compared with the pooled results of both BEACOPP variants. The 24-month FFTF rate was 75% for COPP/ABVD and 84% for BEACOPP pooled (P = .034). There was 12% progressive disease with COPP/ABVD and 6% with BEACOPP pooled. Differences in survival were not significant in sequential analysis. The acute toxicity of baseline BEACOPP resembled that of COPP/ABVD; escalated BEACOPP showed increased but manageable hematologic toxicity.
CONCLUSION Combined with local irradiation, BEACOPP in one or both variants shows superior disease control compared with COPP/ABVD, with acceptable acute toxicity. Further follow-up is required to assess the effect of dosage and the effect on survival and late toxicities.

